
###Supply chain

####Strategy

After studying the outside forces affecting the business, which we in this report grouped as market, norms, technology and law, a company can start developing a strategy for a successful business.
However, this is not enough. A successful strategy will soon be followed by competitors. A company will get a competitive advantage when it can deliver the best products, at the fastest rate, the best quality and for the lowest cost.
Charles fine puts it clear in his clockspeed paper (Charles Fine). Supply chain is a strategic weapon. The model he proposes to think about and design a company is 3D concurrent engineering.
It is the overlap of 3 disciplines : product (design and architecture) process (technical capabilities and manufacturing system) and supply chain(architecture and the logisitcs and coordination system).

*Add the 3 rings of 3D concurrent engineering here*

Pradeep Fernandes adds a fourth dimension : Marketing. This is the connection between studying the outside forces and working on internal operations. And that is exactly where a company in a nascent market has to excel in. Therefore, in this section, we assess the dimensions of the extended "4D" concurrent engineering in the insect business.

*Add the 4 rings of 3D concurrent engineering + marketing here*

*These four questions could be slightly accentuated in the design.*

Vertical integration : where should a company position itself in the complete supply chain from growing the insects to selling them to customers?

Marketing : how to use the supply chain process as a strategic weapon in making customers buy mealworm products?

Global supply chain : should a company produce and sell globally or locally?

Clockspeed : What is the clockspeed of the industry and how does this affect innovation in the industry?



####Vertical integration : positioning

In the 1980ies, IBM, completely dominant in the computer industry, launched the personal computer. They chose to make it a modular system and outsourced parts such as the processor (Intel) and the operating system (Microsoft). This choice was made to increase the speed to market and simplify the task of setting up a supply chain.
They got it wrong. The modular PC they built became just a standard box, while 'Intel Inside' and 'Operated by Windows' became the reasons to choose a PC for most of the customers. In 2004, IBM had to sell its PC division to Lenovo(http://news.cnet.com/IBM-sells-PC-group-to-Lenovo/2100-1042_3-5482284.html).
This story, again by Charles Fine, reveals the strategic impact of make-buy decisions. It is not just about lowering costs. A company has to carefully choose and develop its core competencies. Only then, outsourcing decisions can be made. To help with choosing the right core competencies, we break the vertical supply chain for mealworm based foods down into 3 parts :

Production of insects

Processing insects into a product

Selling and marketing to end consumer

#####Production (breeding or rearing) of insects


Production is nowadays clearly a key competitive advantage because the knowledge of breeding insects is not yet fully developed.
Much is done by convention and not yet backed by extensive research.
Doing production in house is the only way to collect all information about processes and to implement continuous improvement.
However, once production processes are developed and the insect market starts to take off, production with as goal the intermediary product of mealworm flour will endure fierce competition. This both from existing pet food insect companies who want to tap into an additional market or other previous startups who developed their production processes as well. Mealworm flour will become a staple food that competes on price. Once this stage of competition is reached, a company needs to make the choice between staying in production or focussing on processing. If they stay, or they will have to develop the lowest cost processes or they will have to diversify. Diversifying is possible by working on the nutritional content of the flour and producing different kinds of flour meeting the nutritional needs of different market segments.

So far, we assume that production will be done in large factories. Another possibility is distributed production of insects. In third world countries, a minilivestock of insects can improve the livelyhood of people as it provides an additional source of income and food(FAO report p.125). In the West, urban farming is growing popular. Due to space limits in developed cities, nowadays it only supplies 5% of the urban food consumption(Future Directions international http://www.futuredirections.org.au/publications/food-and-water-crises/1406-feeding-the-cities-is-urban-agriculture-the-future-of-food-security.html). Concentrating on species such as insects, who require less space than other animals can be a strategic decision for urban farmers.

To help with a choice between traditional big factories and distributed production, we provide a list of advantages and disadvantages.

Big factories :

+ Economies of scale.

+ Control of product safety and nutritional content and collection of all process data to make fast improvements is possible with modern technology.

+ In house development of production competencies and capabilities, development of optimal and automated production processes.

+ No complex supplier coordination system needed.

- Large investment, large financial risk.

Distributed production :

+ Less financial risk : you don't have to invest in a factory.

+ Less demand risk : it grows an insect community that probably becomes a loyal customer base.

+ More liquidity : costs are more variable as it is easy to stop buying from some people when the demand is low due to the contracts that are small in quantity and duration.

- High quality cost: tracking of production practices needed to ensure quality. With modern technology this should be possible.

- High coordination cost : logistics and subcontracts contracts require a substantial effort.

#####Processing into insect products
Here economies of scale are very important. Only a fully automated process that can process insects continuously is viable in the long term.
Therefore, sourcing insects from different breeding plants will involve lower risks. The cumulative capacity of different mealworm plants can be needed to suplly a continuous mealworm based food product. Pests breaking out in an insect population is another risk that can be minimized with multiple supply plants. If a pest is breaking out in one plant, there can still be sourced from another plant.

Again, extensive data collection in order to reach continuous improvement is a need for a successful company.

A key competitive advantage will be inventing products that have a delicious taste and good appearance. These will be needed to grow the market from almost zero today to a serious alternative for traditional meat.
In parallel, the processes to make these food products will have to be developed.

#####Selling and marketing to endconsumer

Very related to the end product, this last part can create an enormous value if it can make people believe in the products. This will make the difference between being able to ask a relatively high price or having to compete with cheap products, such as for example frozen burgers.
The next part will go in more detail about strategies to build a brand as insect producer. Here, we limit the discussion to the different possibilities in sales channels.

Supermarkets : have a high buyer power but it is the most convenient way to buy food for Europeans and Americans. Therefore, it has to become a sales channel once the mealworm product market becomes big enough. Will require to deliver high volumes with constant quality, not very suitable for a startup.

Specialized shops : shops specializing in bio- and organic food can be a good base to start selling the products. Typically, products sold there have a higher price, but they will ask to proof that the food sold is healthy/environmental friendly.

Online : Currently, this is the way most used to sell insects. However, a startup will very likely have to make use from external package delivery companies. This has some limitations. In China, delivery of food is normal, but in Europe and the USA not really. Fresh food, apart from ready meals, is almost not possible. An alternative is that a company sets up a delivery system by itself. That is risky with unsure future sales of the insect based products.

Restaurants : Can be an easy way to distribute insects. Also, cooks who like to work with an insect provider will express their creativity and find new ways to cook with mealworm flour.

festivals-party : Tapping in the event-sector with snacks by selling on festivals or parties is another way to reach the consumer. Moreover, it is a marketing tool you get paid for. A startup only has to convince the organizators and can showcase its product to all participants of the party.

#####key competitive advantages : recommendation

In the short term, with the lack of reliable producers of insects today, combined with the advantages of learning from process data, a complete vertical integration of the supply chain can be advantageous.

The following graph, provided by the US Department of Agriculture, gives an indication that this strategy is probably not the best in the long term.
There is a huge difference between what the farmer gets for the food he produces and the ultimate retail price the customer pays. That money goes partly to the food processors and distributors and partly to the marketing and sales channels or retailers. The more processed the food is, the bigger this difference.
For complext food products based on insect flour, a big difference can be expected. Therefore, most of the generated value lies in the more downstream activities.

*Add graph of the spread in price between farmer and retailer of bread and flour here, I have the pdf*
( US Department of Agriculture http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-markets-prices/food-prices,-expenditures-costs.aspx)

Still, producing of the insects itself will stay an important part of the supply chain. An analogy can be drawn with burgers, in which the best working marketing tool for the past years is using locally grown fresh beef for the burgers. The same will be true for insects.
An insect producer can make it a strategy to grow them organically and make the processors and marketeers use his high quality insects as a sales strategy.
For the processors and marketeers, a strategy can be to work closely together with suppliers and license them for products while helping them to develop the right capabilities in terms of health and nutrition.

####Marketing & Supply chain as a strategic weapon

The highly educated, middle class, young urban population of the creative class in Europe or North-America are most likely to adapt to insect food. They can spend a premium on food that is delicious, healthy and environmental friendly.
That insects can fulfill all these requirements is likely the best marketing tool to make them accept and embrace insect based food.

Nowadays, most startups use crowdfunding and an active bog linked to their website to grow a community. This involves a high degree of transparency of what they do. Even better in this are open source companies, in the beginning only for software, but today open source hardware companies also start operating. The advantages of this business model include pre financing, attachment of the customer to the brand through a community and customer involvement in new product creation among others.
An in depth article of the benefits of such a business model is written by Simone Cicero (http://www.open-electronics.org/the-truth-about-open-source-hardware-business-models/). Would insect food companies benefit from such a business model?

Large, traditional companies are still reluctant to give away information about their products and processes. Insect food companies can make use of this lack of information for consumers who want to be informed about what they eat. Transparent information about the supply chain leading to the final product, easy accessible to the consumer, will contrast against the fuzzy origin of other processed foods. That's how the creative class can be convinced that insect food  is delicious, healthy and environmental friendly.

#####Transparency, the strategic weapon of the supply chain.

The basic idea here is that a consumer should have as much information as possible available about the complete process the final food package went through.
Therefore, every package should have a unique ID with which the consumer has access to a webpage listing information about exact nutritional value, environmental impact, ingredients and production processes.
Adding time and geographical stamps to the different stages of the production process and supply chain is the last important feature. It serves 3 goals :

1 Thrust : with time and place that can be verified, a customer will be more likely to thrust the information you provide.

2 Anti fake products : Having to fake a bunch of data for every fake food package will make it more difficult for companies trying to fake your products.

3 Improvement coordination : providing all data to the consumer also means that the company has all information of its production processes centrally available, a huge advantage in an industry that still has room for improvements.

This gives people the ability to fully understand what is inside their food.
The usage of locally sourced, natural ingredients will be encouraged.
Moreover, when something is wrong with the procut, a unique ID makes it easy to trace it back. Spillage is also reduced, as exact information about the process parameters can be used for taylored information of how long the food product can be kept fresh.

First, we give a more detailed overview of what kind of information can be useful to attach to the product. Then, possible technologies to implement this are discussed.

The information should consist of 3 big parts.

The first part is a map following the complete trajectory of the food package, from the moment the insects are born to the package ending up in the store.
Every part of the trajectory can be clicked on and then shows the time , the process done during that time(breeding, transport...) and inputs (the feed for the mealworms...) or process parameters (temperature during transport).

The second part is a table giving the exact nutritional content, comparing that content to the average nutritional content of the mealworm based product and to a substitute product not based on mealworms.
The third part is a table giving the environmental impact of the product and comparing it to substitute products.
Both of them involve making a base study of the nutritional content/environmental impact and then adjusting the model with the exact process parameters for every batch.


#####Technology : IPv6, blockchain and rfid

Currently, some existing but not yet very known or understanded technologies could help with this information collection and display.

The easiest way to present the information of a package to consumers is to add a QR code to the package. After scanning, consumers will reach the webpage of the package.
A webpage for every package sounds crazy. Until recently, this would not be possible. However, the new IPv6 internet standard allows for enough unique IP adresses to provide every atom in the universe with its own IP adress.

Another action that would greatly improve the information storage and collection of data is attaching a chip to every package.
The best would be a chip where every partial process in the supply chain writes information to. Automatically, then it can be tracked that all processes are done and under the right paramters.
RFID is a promising technology to achieve that. Passive high frequency RFID tags can be written and read multiple times and now store up to 65 kb of information, what can be enough to store the raw process data(http://www.rfidjournal.com/articles/view?1335/2).
One problem is that the price of RFID tags today starts with a couple of cents but can quickly rise to several dollars with additional functionality(http://www.rfidjournal.com/faq/show?85). A more in depth research of the possibility to use the tags in this field is needed.

A last promising technology for making the entire supply chain more transparent is blockchain. Blockchain is the technology where bitcoin is based on. It provides a way to institute a thrust mechanism between two parties without having the need of a third party to make the transaction thrustworthy.
It works as follows, explained through bitcoin : Everyone who owns a bitcoin has a public and a private key. When you do a transaction, you need your private key to approve the transaction from one person to another. The public key of the bitcoin is handed over. That transaction of the public key is added to the blockchain. Basically, the blockchain is a long list of all transactions done since the beginning of bitcoin, stored by everyone in the blockchain network. Every 10 minutes, a new block is added to the chain, updating the blockchain of every user with the latest transactions.
Now, when someone wants to spend the money again, the blockchain will notice that the person already spend the money as his version of the blockchain is not the same as the blockchain of all other users.
This very short explanation cannot cover the whole working principle and the applications possible because of this working principle. For that, we can refer to the original bitcoin paper by Satoshi Nakamoto (https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) and the blockchain book by Melanie Swan (see teambition to reference it).

What is important is that from what you know with the explanation given here, you can start thinking about how it can be used in a transparent supply chain.
Using a blockchain with a public key attached to every batch of insects resulting in a package of insect food can implement the idea of adding timestamps, thrust and unambiguous information to a supply chain.
It will be an easy way to control suppliers. With the blockchain publicly available, the company is accountable for the different process steps. Timestamps make sure the process cannot be faked or changed.

How exactly to implement this is a tough question. Right now, still lots of startups are in the developing phase of developing blockchains for other uses than online money.
What can be done for sure is using a blockchain internally, to make all people involved in the process of making one batch accountable for their process step. Making use of such a high level of internal control and information sharing can then be used as a marketing tool to assure people that the quality standards of the company are very high.
Even better would be the complete public available blockchain, but this needs more research and raises another question. Is it dangerous to reveal that much information about your processes in public?

It is true that competing companies will try to make use of the information you share.
However, in a starting industry, having lots of players in the market is good. Most of the people still never heard of eating insects, so the more small companies promoting it, the better. On the famous S curve, we are still in the early market. Lots of small companies are growing the market, not really competing for the same customer. What they try to do is setting the standard, making their product or design the product people expect in this market.
Once a couple of companies can set the standard, the industry will reach a strategic inflection point (Only The Paranoid Survive by Andrew S. Grove, CEO of Intel). From the moment that dominant design is set, the market really starts to take of. Lots of companies fail and the ones that stay grow big and start competing each other.

*insert a stephen lu picture*

This short introduction in early market economics makes clear that the biggest threat for a company in the beginning is not competition. The biggest threat is not being part of the companies setting the standard.
Using modern technologies to collect all information and making that transparent can become a high quality standard all companies have to follow.
Another important advantage is that only the company producing the data will have access to all data. With all this information about processes, it will be possible, together with the short life cycle and fast clockspeed (see further), to improve the production technology very fast and iteratively.
That means that once the market is big, the company already has such an efficient, high end or cost effective production process that this sets a barrier for other companies to start competing.


#####reach the consumer

As discussed before, online sales is the most popular medium nowadays. It seems to be that this is the general case for startups. Therefore, companies do not think a lot about how to sell their products and just assume the best way is using the internet.
However, it should not be forgotten that other channels can make the difference between becoming successful or not. Having a stand selling products on festivals, selling in specialized shops, selling in fitness centra or sportsclothing shops when sports people are targeted... Every company should think about alternative ways to sell in order to pick the best one.

In a later stage, once the product becomes successful, supermarkets should be targeted.
Not trying to do that is knowing that you will only be able to compete in a niche market, even when insect food becomes mainstream.
In some cases, products can even be jump started by supermarkets. A supermarket pushing insect food could greatly improve the initial acceptance.

####Sourcing & Supply chain : global or local?

A company starting today cannot afford anymore to regard the border of its home country as the border of its economic system. The world is flat, and companies need to be ready to accept the opportunities and risks of a global economy.
Starting mealworm companies have to decide whether or not source and or sell abroad. Also, knowing what competition they can expect from companies abroad is very valuable.

First the last question. Competition from countries with cheaper labor can become an issue, as the high cost of producing insects right now is because of the high degree of manual work (according to mail with tiny farms+ other sources).
Also there are already bigger companies producing insects in such countries. In the markets part we already talked about haocheng mealworm inc. , a Chinese company producing mealworms for animal consumption on industrial scale.

A strategy could be to start sourcing from them once they become a threat.
However, 2 facts shield local production in Western countries from this threat : perishability and consumer acceptance. Especially the last one is a big argument against sourcing abroad or being afraid from outside competitors.

Perishability : part of the food to sell will be fresh food, putting an extra barrier to companies who produce abroad. For mealworm flour in itself this is not a barrier.

Acceptance :Consumers will most likely start accepting insects when they see the benefits of delicious food, produced organically and environmental friendly, thrustable and healthy. A strategy burger restaurants use to get rid of the fast food image is exactly that their burgers are mad with natural beef from local farmers.
Especially the cheap labor countries will not be regarded as the right source for healthy and environmental friendly food. Moreover, often, they will indeed not meet the quality standards set by Western countries.

At the market side, European or American companies can off course try to target other states or countries than their own. For this, first they will have to wait for more extensive regulations backing this up. Developing countries are a market for insect food as well. They already eat them so there is no barrier of acceptance.
However, the business models described in this report, are focussed on the West. They involve high quality processed food. This is too expensive to apply in developing countries. They have less people of the creative class and will not pay a higher price for food. A mealworm flour company will not be able to use the same business models there. Therefore, it is left out of the scope of this report.

Pleurette in Paris and Rotterzwam in The Netherlands are growing mushrooms on coffee waste in containers and other small spaces in the middle of the city. They are inspired by The Blue Economy, a book and movement started by Gunther Pauli(http://theblueeconomy.org/blue/Home.html).
Insects seem to have similar properties as mushrooms : they can be grown in small spaces or inside, could be grown on waste (if the law would allow it), target an urban population and benefit from local production.
Therefore, the blue economy business model seems more appropriate than the mainstream global market model. Keep it simple and local!


####Clockspeed & Innovation

Clockspeed is a concept defined by Richard Fine to compare the speed of the innovation cycle and market change between different industries.
High tech industries have a high clockspeed, they can be considered the fast dying and continuously evolving fruit flies of an industry. Established global food companies are working in a much slower clockspeed, they can almost be considered as the turtles of industry clockspeeds.
We believe mealworm food companies can become the fruit flies of the food industry.

First of all, there is a need. Insect companies need to innovate in their production processes to make them more cost effective and in their final products to make them more appealing. Otherwise, they just won't survive.
Also, there is no ballast of existing practices and big established organizations. Creativity and innovation can still thrive.
The collection of process information from the beginning will also give a competitive edge against traditional companies.

Mealworms are like fruitflies. The lifecycle of a mealworm is only (check earlier parts). Companies leveraging the fruit fly abilities of a mealworm will advance faster than all other companies.

Innovation  through the continuous collection of data about breeding process. Recording all process data during every short mealworm lifecycle will spur innovation. Constantly working with slight variations in the processes will become the base for experiments that lead to insects containing the optimal nutritional content made at the cheapest price.

Today, much of the breeding is still done without the a full understanding of the best parameters. Companies just use conventions. Don't stick to them, or you will definitely fall behind in the fast clockspeed mealworm food industry.





OLD VERSION!!!!!!!!!


###Supply chain

####Strategy
3D concurrent engineering : supply chain is a strategic weapon.
Therefore we need to investigate the following questions :

Vertical integration : where to position you in the supply chain from growing the insects to selling them to customers?

Marketing : how to use the supply chain process as a strategic weapon in making customers buy your product?

Global supply chain : do we produce and sell globally or locally?

/*I have a doubt whether we are or not an actual company, if we are not then you have to adjust the titles, but if we are then its ok.


Clockspeed : What is the clockspeed of the industry and how does this affect innovation in the industry?

####Vertical integration : positioning
What are the key competences? To know that, we first need to do a breakdown in the different parts of the vertical supply chain for food products based on mealworms :

Production of insects

Processing insects into a product

Selling and marketing to endconsumer

#####Production (breeding or rearing) of insects
Big factories, advantages :

1 economies of scale

2control of product safety and nutritional content and collection of all process data to make fast improvements

3 in house development of production competencies and capabilities, develoment of optimal and automated production processes.


OR sourcing from small household farms could be possible if everything can be tracked (blockchain technology). In that case the quality can be assured. This is not our focus, however, we want to mention it. What is good about this is that big upfront investments are not needed and that it helps to grow a community who likes to eat insects. This reduces risk in 3 ways at the same time :

1 less financial risk : you con't have to invest in a factory

2 less demand risk : it creates a more loyal customer baser.

3 more liquidity : costs are more variable as it is easy to stop buying from some people when the demand is low due to the contracts that are small in quantity and duration.


Production is nowadays clearly a key competitive advantage because the knowledge of production is still in full development. However, once this is developed, production with as goal the intermediary product of mealworm flour won't stay a competitive advantage. Mealworm flour will become a staple food that can only compete on price. However, then this can be changed by working on the nutritional content of the flour and producing different kinds of flour meeting the nutritional needs of different market segments.

#####Processing into insect products
Here economies of scale are very important. Only a fully automated process that can process insects continuously is viable in the long term. Therefore, it will be best to be able to source insects from different breeding plants. If there is for example a pest breaking out in one plant, there can still be sourced from another plant.

A key competitive advantage will be inventing products that have a delicious taste and good appearance. These will be needed to grow the market from almost zero today to a serious alternative for traditional meat.
#####Selling and marketing to endconsumer

Very related to the endproduct, this last part can create an enormous value if it can make people believe in the products. This will make the difference between being able to ask a relatively high price or having to compete with cheap products, for example frozen burgers.

It also includes the channels you choose to sell :

Supermarkets : have a high buyer power but most convenient way to buy food for Europeans and Americans so has to become a sales channel once the mealworm product market becomes big enough. Will require you to deliver high volumes with constant quality, not very suitable for a startup.

Specialized shops : shops specializing in bio- and organic food can be a good base to start selling the products. Typically, products sold there have a higher price, but you will have to proof that the food you sell is healthy/environmental friendly.

Online : Currently, this is the way most used to sell insects. However, as you will have to make use from external package delivery companies, this has some limitations. In China, delivery of food is normal, but in Europe and the USA not really. Fresh food is almost not possible. An alternative is to set up a delivery system yourself but that is too risky with unsure future sales of the insect based products.

restaurants : Can be an easy way to distribute insects. Also, cooks who like to work with you will express their creativity and find new ways to cook with mealworm flour.

festivals-party : Tapping in the event-sector with snacks you sell on festivals or parties is another way to reach the consumer. Moreover, it is a marketing tool where you get paid for. You only have to convince the organizators and can showcase your product to all participants of the party.

#####key competitive advantages : recommendation

Short term : producing and processing and selling

Long term : processing and selling


**IDEA (explained in business model part, is there a need to add it somewhere here as well?) : work together with existing companies for petfood and start licensing them for your products while helping them develop the capabilities in terms of health and nutrition to grow insects for human consumption**





####Marketing & Supply chain as a strategic weapon


#####Transparency

The strategic weapon of the supply chain.
The highly educated, middle class, young urban population of the creative class in Europe or amerika is our target. They can spend a premium on food that is delicious, healthy and environmental friendly.
How to prove this? ==> Transparency

Attach a chip to each product package. The process parameters that you will show to the consumer of that specific package (accessable via a QR code) :

Start with a batch of insects, their breeding times, temperatures, nutritional input (food)...
Then transportation time and temperature of the environment while being transported to the factory to process them.
Then the parameters during processing.
Then time and transport to end consumer.

Also add information about the processes used (the conceptual idea so people get it but cannot ‘copy’ the machine)
Also add the places where it has been with gps(makes it more difficult to make fake products and proves that it is locally made).
Information about the exact nutritional content needs to be visualized.
Finally, add all resources used and make a sum of them to show that it is environmentally friendly.


This gives people the ability to fully understand what is inside their food. As we will only use natural ingredients they will be able to judge that these ingredients are healthy.
Also with this ID it becomes possible to warn people when something is wrong with their product and to trace those products back.
Also it can help us to give more accurate information on how long you can still keep it fresh.

#####Blockchain technology

How to make them believe us?
Technology can help us in this way.

**MAYBE : put a general description of blockchain in the tech part, and then we see that we have different uses for that.**

We can make some kind of blockchain issued by us but publicly known. Only we can issue it, so this makes it more difficult to make a fake product. When people check their product online, they will allways be able to check the full blockchain, so we can not falsify it.
Every product package has an id and chip with a blockchain attached to it. The blockchain works in a way that it will only execute the next step if the previous step is done, with a timestamp. This means we cannot cheat and put fake things inside.
Timestamps are also a way to control suppliers.

REMARK : actually I am still not sure how exactly blockhain can help us. Do you have some better ideas, do you get the idea I describe here?
*I agree that adjusting blockchain to our product is really forcing it, but we HAVE to. Maybe we can use blockchain as a way to ensure our transactions online?, payment as bitcoin, or some other applications. The blockchain id in every package was our original idea, I strongly think we have to stay by it*

Is this dangerous?
Off course, making it open encourages competition. However, in the beginning of a new industry, having lots of players in the market is good as this will help grow the market. Then, to survive, it is important to become the strongest company that can set the standard (refer to Stephen lu). This model that can be followed by others is good as standard and once they use this standard it will be easier for us to source our products there.
Also, an important advantage is that you can keep all information, big data. Your competitors can not acquire as much information as you.  With all this data, it will be possible, together with the short life cycle and fast clockspeed, to improve the process very fast and iteratively. This can lead to new opportunities in terms of nutritional content and waste, because nowadays much is done by convention and not yet backed by extensive research.


#####reach the consumer

As discussed before, online sales is the most popular medium nowadays. It seems to be that this is the general case for startups. Therefore, companies do not think a lot about how to sell their products and just assume the best way is using the internet.
However, it should not be forgotten that other channels can make the difference between becoming succesful or not. Having a stand selling your products on festivals, selling in specialized shops, selling in fitness centra or sportsclothing shops when you target sports people... Every company should think about alternative ways to sell in order to pick the best one.

In a later stage, once the product becomes succesful, supermarkets can be targeted.
*In some cases, products can be jump started by super markets, if we get some supermarket to push the initiative it could greatly improves the initial acceptance, therefore the association with super markets could be very important*


####Sourcing & Supply chain : global or local?
Competition from countries with cheaper labour can become an issue, as the highest cost of producing insects right now is manual work (according to mail with tiny farms+ other sources).
Also there are already bigger companies in those countries, e.g. haocheng mealworm inc.
A strategy could be to start sourcing from them once they become a threat.
However, 2 facts shield local production in Western countries from this threat : perishability and consumer acceptance.
/*Remember to point out that most of the cheap labor countries products could not be as high quality or the process could not eb as green

Acceptance :In this stage only if it is regarded as delicious, healthy, organic, environmental friendly, thrustable, grown in own country.
Therefore the transparency strategy and local production.

Perishability : part of the food to sell will be fresh food, putting an extra barrier to companies who produce abroad. For mealworm flour in itself this is not a barrier.

For fresh insect based products : very local production :
Possible to grow them in urban areas or near to urban areas in order to deal with transportation cost and time (maybe the mushroom farming as an example with link to the blue economy, waste!!)
.

Developing countries also not a target market : less creative class & will not pay a higher price for food. Therefore, not much advantages of a global supply chain. Keep it local!

####Clockspeed & Innovation
The life cycle of insects is very short, as mentioned in earlier parts
This makes the clockspeed of innovation in the growing process very high
Also goods are fast consumed, so consumers will very fast come back or not.
Look up more about clockspeed....

Innovation through the continuous collection of data about breeding process. Constantly working with slight variations can become the base for experiments that can lead to insects containing the optimal nutritional content made at the cheapest price.
Much of the breeding today is still done without a full understanding of the best parameters, this will change this to a fully known and optimized process.
**we should write more about this in the technology part**

###Business Model

Here we want to present the business model of the ideal insect for food company. It is a fictitious mind exercise, not pretending to give a waterproof strategy to win the market. However, it will help to give an understanding of all the concepts we touched throughout the report and show the direction that our research is indicating.

####Business model canvas
The business model canvas will visualize and summarize the ideas we have about organizing your complete supply chain.

I will make 1 canvas for an early stage startup company and one for a later stage company.

Do this first or afterwards? Or both?
Still to do.
/If you want to present both it will look very complete

####Growth strategy

Start a crowdfunding campaign to test the market and get money (I should find an article about the financial and customer binding implications of crowdfunding).

Then start with producing yourself to have a learning curve of what is possible with insects breeding. Only in a later stage you can specialize in only processing and sales. Record all information about your processes and make this information transparent.

Sell small quantities through specialized channels. Focus on products with a high price, niche market like snacks, partyfood, food for sportspeople, selling to restaurants…

After getting a higher learning curve you can probably improve nutritional content and rampup production.

However even better is to start working with producers of insects on a lower level and teach them your standards (benefits : economies of scale, avoid competition from pet food producers). You implement your standards in terms of transparency in your suppliers.

Start specializing in the processing with flour as raw material into a product and selling the final products.

Now change your sales channels to supermarkets etc.

Products best produced in this stage are burgers targeted as meat against beef burgers and not as meat susbsitute.
/*burgers? are we just limiting into burgers? i think we have to leave it broad to any kind of meat style meatballs, steaks, etc*

####PLC
Add something about the ipodia lecture : product life cycle, early stage, setting the standard and refer to that looking to high tech industries is justified here.
